Informasi Publikasi I Gede Agus Widyadana, S.T., M.Eng., PH.D.
	Optimization of the multi-objective green cyclical inventory routing problem using discrete multi-swarm PSO method	This study proposes a multi-objective green cyclic inventory routing problem (MOGCIRP) model to capture the influence of both transportation and inventory management toward cost and environmental issues. The proposed IRP considers single and multiple cyclic tours, handling time, and capacitated fleet with weight dependent fuel consumption to model more comprehensive logistics activities. A discrete multi-swarm particle swarm optimization (PSO) and a heuristic optimization are proposed to yield the Pareto set of MOCGIRP. Results show that inventory management activities contribute considerably (17–22%) to total cost and emission rate. Additionally, multiple tours performance is consistently better than single tour method.	Journal	2018	Multi Objective Green Cyclic Inventory Routing Problem, Particle Swarm Optimization
	Economic order quantity model for deteriorating items with planned backorder level	In this study, a deteriorating inventory problem with and without backorders is developed. From the literature search, this study is one of the first attempts by researchers to solve a deteriorating inventory problem with a simplified approach. The optimal solutions are compared with the classical methods for solving deteriorating inventory model. The total cost of the simplified model is almost identical to the original model.	Journal	2011	Economic Order Quantity
	Revisiting lot sizing for an inventory system with product recovery	This note investigates the study by Teunter (2004) [1] on lot sizing for inventory systems with product recovery where lot sizing formulae for two recovery policies ((1,R) and (P,1)) are derived. Instead of applying the classical optimization technique, we develop an integrated solution procedure for each of the two policies using algebraic approaches. Numerical analysis show that our examples result in a lower total cost for both policies.	Journal	2010	Lot Sizing, Rework, Algebraic Approach
	A constrained multi-products EPQ inventory model with discrete delivery order and lot size	This paper proposes an alternative heuristic algorithm for a multi-product Economic Production Quantity (EPQ) vendor–buyer integrated model with Just in Time (JIT) philosophy and a budget constraint. This type of problem is usually solved by a Mixed Integer Non Linear Problem (MINLP), which is complex and computationally expensive. The proposed heuristic algorithm involves less computation and therefore it is less expensive than the previously published algorithms. Furthermore, the heuristic algorithm is simpler as it derives the integer values for all discrete variables in a straightforward manner. Through empirical experimentation, it is demonstrated that the heuristic algorithm provides solutions closer to the lower bound in a very short time.	Journal	2014	Economic Production Quantity, Mized Integer Non Linear Problem
	A production model for deteriorating items with stochastic preventive maintenance time and rework process with FIFO rule	Due to unreliable production facility and stochastic preventive maintenance, deriving an optimal production inventory decision in practice is very complicated. In this paper, we develop a production model for deteriorating items with stochastic preventive maintenance time and rework using the first in first out (FIFO) rule. From our literature search, no study has been done on the above problem. The problem is solved using a simple search procedure; this makes it more practical for use by industries. Two case examples using uniform and exponential distribution preventive maintenance time are applied. Examples and sensitivity analysis are conducted for each case. The results show that rework and preventive maintenance time have significant affected the total cost and the optimal production time. This provides helpful managerial insights to help management in making smart decisions.	Journal	2013	First in First Out, EPQ
