Informasi Publikasi Dr. Gregorius Satia Budhi, S.T., M.T.
	Clustering-based assessment of solar irradiation and temperature attributes for PV power generation site selection: A case of Indonesia s Java-Bali region	This study presents clustering-based assessments of solar attributes for locating potential solar photovoltaic (PV) power plant sites using k-means and density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) by examining the yearly average single-attribute and three-attribute clustering on a dataset of long-term hourly-based direct and diffuse irradiation, ambient temperature, and solar PV power output from 2005 to 2022. Three-attribute clustering enables stakeholders to better understand the characteristics of a cluster by collectively identifying three solar attributes and the magnitude of each attribute in an area or cluster. The presence of this information, which constitutes the clusters, suggests that these attributes have different effects on solar PV output power in different clusters. Although k-means is an effective method for investigating potential locations for PV power plant placements, DBSCAN offers users an alternative method for accomplishing a similar goal. In the case of three-attribute clustering of direct irradiation with k-means and DBSCAN, the 18-year mean value of clusters with the highest yearly average value is achieved at very similar values of 0.305 kW/m2 and 0.310 kW/m2, respectively. It turns out that only six years of direct irradiation had an annual mean value of less than 0.305 kW/m2. This finding implies that in the long run, the solar resources in terms of direct irradiation will typically surpass 0.3 kW/m2/MW installed capacity over all areas suitable for PV power plants. While focusing on the Java-Bali region, Indonesia, the findings, and methods appear to be of broader interest to policymakers, particularly in developing countries where solar PV is considered an option for sustainable energy generation.	Jurnal	2024	Clustering; solar PV; site selection; solar attributes; long-term
	Topic Modelling and Density-based Clustering for Opinion Anomaly Detection on Forum Discussion Transcript	A directed discussion is a platform where community members may discuss specific topics whose scope is defined by the forum's facilitator. Several issues arose in a setting where each speaker's comment regarding the discussion topic must be noted for further manual and thorough analysis. Due to the sheer volume of the speech data and the limitation of available manpower, the assigned annotator for a given discussion frequently lost focus and became unable to take accurate note of each speaker's comment, resorting to paraphrasing. The paraphrasing caused a loss of information, context, and personal bias that prevented an objective evaluation. This study intended to address the issue and is conducted to objectively retrieve the comments contributed by each discussion member regarding a given topic and utilise unsupervised learning to find and identify anomalous comments. In particular, comments that are not appropriate to the topic of the discussion become the focus of this study. To this end, we propose a feature extraction and anomaly detection pipeline. The obtained text corpus will have its features extracted with word embedding and topic modelling. The extracted features will then become input for the anomaly detection methods: density-based clustering (DBSCAN), Isolation Forest (IF), and Local Outlier Factor (LOF). This research aims to search for effective combinations of parameters to obtain said anomalies. Our results indicate that topic modelling with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) as a feature extraction method and DBSCAN could isolate inappropriate, unrelated comments with up to 71.42% accuracy.	Artikel	2024	Unsupervised learning, Topic Modelling, Density-based Clustering, Text Anomaly Detection
	Detecting signs of depression using social media texts through an ensemble of ensemble classifiers	Artificial intelligence-based machine learning models have been widely used to explore and address various mental health-related problems in recent years, including depression. In this study, we present an ensemble approach to complement the 90 unique input features that we proposed in a previous study on depression detection using social media texts. Our proposed Ensemble of Ensemble Classifiers (EECs) combines many ensemble models, including Bagging Predictors, Random Forests, Adaptive Boosting and Gradient Boosting, as inner ensembles. These inner ensembles are arranged in a parallel fashion, where each of them is trained using different subsets of data sampled from the training data via bootstrap sampling. After the models are trained, during the testing phase, the results of all inner ensembles are processed using two methods—majority vote or class priority threshold—to get the final result as an output. From the experiments, we find that EECs are accurate in detecting signs of depression in social media users by analysing their posts in social media platforms such as Twitter. Our approach outperforms other ensemble methods on the public datasets we used. Moreover, if set correctly, the parameters of EECs can further improve the performance of the proposed ensemble in detecting signs of depression.	Jurnal	2024	Depression detection, social media, ensemble models, machine learning
	Time Series Forecasting for Daily to Monthly Temporal Hourly-based Solar PV Output Power	This paper presents the application of the Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average Exogenous (ARIMAX) model and compares its performance with Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) and Seasonal Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average (SARIMA) in forecasting daily, weekly, and monthly average solar PV output power. This study considers long-term hourly temporal-based solar PV output power for the Java-Bali region of Indonesia, as obtained from the Renewables.ninja solar PV model web-based tool. Using the Dash framework and Python, the study develops a web-based dashboard application that allows users to explore and analyse daily to monthly forecasting using these three methods. The testing results show that the time series methods are best suited for predicting monthly average output power, with the ARIMAX outperforming all other methods when applied to all cities/regencies in Central Java. It achieved the RMSE values of 10.74, 25.36, and 60.27 for daily, weekly, and monthly forecasting, respectively.	Konferensi	2023	Machine learning algorithms, Time series analysis, Predictive models, Forecasting
	Framework and Clustering Dashboard for Analysing Temporal-Based Parameters of Solar PV Output Model	This paper presents a framework and dashboard designed to analyze and present long-term hourly temporal-based parameters of a solar photovoltaic (PV) output model. The framework uses time series and artificial intelligence-based methods to analyze direct and diffuse irradiance, as well as temperature data, while the web-based dashboard aims to present the characterization and prediction results of these parameters. The framework's first part clusters the three parameters and solar PV output over a ten-year period and beyond, focusing on the Java-Bali region in Indonesia. The paper emphasizes the importance of a dashboard that visualizes areas across regions resulting from the k-means clustering analysis. This framework provides vital insights into the potential of solar photovoltaics, specifically regarding spatial issues that may influence investment decision-making.	Konferensi	2023	Machine learning, framework, time series, Clustering, Analytical models, Temperature distributions, Photovoltaic systems
	A Multi-type Classifier Ensemble for Detecting Fake Reviews Through Textual-based Feature Extraction	The financial impact of online reviews has prompted some fraudulent sellers to generate fake consumer reviews for either promoting their products or discrediting competing products. In this study, we propose a novel ensemble model—the Multi-type Classifier Ensemble (MtCE)—combined with a textual-based featuring method, which is relatively independent of the system, to detect fake online consumer reviews. Unlike other ensemble models that utilise only the same type of single classifier, our proposed ensemble utilises several customised machine learning classifiers (including deep learning models) as its base classifiers. The results of our experiments show that the MtCE can adequately detect fake reviews, and that it outperforms other single and ensemble methods in terms of accuracy and other measurements for all the relevant public datasets used in this study. Moreover, if set correctly, the parameters of MtCE, such as base-classifier types, the total number of base classifiers, bootstrap, and the method to vote on output (e.g., majority or priority), can further improve the performance of the proposed ensemble.	Jurnal	2023	Computing methodologies, Machine learning, Feature Extraction, Multi-type Classifier, Text-based
	Sistem Suggestion dengan Metode TOPSIS untuk Meningkatkan Keberhasilan Serious Game Greenlife Town	Indonesia memiliki potensi sumber energi terbarukan yang sangat besar. Namun, potensi tersebut belum dimanfaatkan semaksimal mungkin. Salah satu penyebabnya adalah masyarakat Indonesia masih belum memahami sumber energi terbarukan dengan baik. Karena pemahaman yang kurang, maka sedikit orang yang termotivasi untuk memajukan sumber energi terbarukan di Indonesia. Solusi untuk mengatasi hal ini adalah dengan dibuatnya platform untuk. edukasi dan motivasi. Penelitian ini membuat platform tersebut dalam bentuk Serious Game. Namun dalam pelaksanaannya, seringkali pemain merasa kesulitan untuk menyelesaikan permainan, sehingga fokus pemain lebih ke penyelesaian masalah daripada menerima informasi. Oleh karena itu, penelitian ini juga membuat sebuah sistem suggestion untuk memberi opsi bantuan kepada pemain menggunakan metode TOPSIS. Hasil pengujian menunjukkan bahwa sistem suggestion tidak mampu meningkatkan keberhasilan pemain dalam menyelesaikan game. Efek yang dihasilkan malah sebaliknya, dimana pemain semakin memiliki nilai akhir yang lebih buruk bahkan menyentuh angka 88%. Kegagalan ini tidak semata-mata disebabkan oleh metode yang dipakai, tetapi juga cara pengimplementasian metode, kenyamanan pengguna dalam bermain, dan bentuk pengujian yang kurang fleksibel.	Jurnal	2022	renewable energy; serious game; suggestion system; TOPSIS
	Penerapan Machine Learning dalam mendeteksi Fake Account pada Instagram	Instagram adalah media sosial keempat yang paling banyak digunakan dalam hal jumlah pengguna aktif. Saat ini, banyak masyarakat yang berusaha ingin meningkatkan jumlah followers-nya untuk alasan lain seperti mendapatkan ketenaran atau ingin terkenal dan dapat dipercaya oleh orang karena memiliki jumlah followers yang banyak. Oleh karena itu, masyarakat membuat fake account yang digunakan untuk meningkatkan jumlah followers-nya dan juga sebagai tempat untuk melakukan tindakan kejahatan seperti penipuan dan cyberbullying. Fleksibilitas dan penyebaran penggunaan seperti itu telah menjadikan Instagram sebagai platform yang digunakan untuk perkembangbiakan fake account.	Jurnal	2022	Fake Account, Fraud, Cyberbullying, Platform, Social Media, Machine Learning
	Aplikasi War Game Pada Mobile Device Menggunakan Sensor Gyroscope Dan Accelerometer	"Saat ini teknologi sudah berkembang sangat pesat. Seiring berjalannya perkembangan teknologi saat ini, banyak sekali permainan-permainan yang bermunculan. Faktanya saat ini permainan sudah menjadi aktivitas sehari-hari didalam masyarakat. Dalam perkembangan teknologi saat ini hampir semua orang memiliki mobile phone. Dimana mobile phone ini mudah untuk didapatkan dan bersifat sangat fleksibel. Dengan menggabungkan kondisi saat ini, maka penelitian ini memanfaatkan kemajuan teknologi yang ada saat ini dan memanfaatkan fleksibilitas mobile phone yang akan diimplementasikan ke dalam sebuah aplikasi yang akan menjadi sarana permainan tembak–tembakan.
Aplikasi ini menggunakan sensor gyroscope dan accelerometer untuk menyelesaikan penelitian ini. Tujuannya adalah untuk menciptakan interaksi dan pengalaman yang baru dalam game mobile serta menciptakan permainan tembak-tembakan yang fleksibel menggunakan teknologi yang ada saat ini. Hasil dari penelitian ini adalah berhasil menciptakan permainan war game. Yang dimana aplikasi ini membutuhkan sinyal yang kuat dan kecepatan internet yang stabil serta harus dimainkan ditempat yang terbuka. Disisi lain aplikasi ini telah berhasil memberikan perhitungan jarak lintasan peluru dan estimasi peluru yang akurat dengan rata–rata selisih±1-3 Meter."	Jurnal	2022	Android; Gyroscope; Accelerometer; War Game.
	A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm for achieving energy efficiency in production environments integrated with multiple automated guided vehicles	Increasing energy shortages and environmental pollution have made energy efficiency an urgent concern in manufacturing plants. Most studies looking into sustainable production in general and energy-efficient production scheduling in particular, however, have not paid much attention to logistical factors (e.g., transport and setup). This study integrates multiple automated guided vehicles (AGVs) into a job-shop environment. We propose a multiobjective scheduling model that considers machine processing, sequence-dependent setup and AGV transport, aiming to simultaneously minimize the makespan, total idle time of machines and total energy consumption of both machines and AGVs. To solve this problem, an effective multiobjective evolutionary algorithm (EMOEA) is developed. Within the EMOEA, an efficient encoding/decoding method is designed to represent and decode each solution. A new crossover operator is proposed for AGV assignment and AGV speed sequences. To balance the exploration and exploitation ability of the EMOEA, an opposition-based learning strategy is incorporated. A total of 75 benchmark instances and a real-world case are used for our experimental study. Taguchi analysis is applied to determine the best combination of key parameters for the EMOEA. Extensive computational experiments show that properly increasing the number of AGVs can shorten the waiting time of machines and achieve a balance between economic and environmental objectives for production systems. The experimental results confirm that the proposed EMOEA is significantly better at solving the problem than three other well-known algorithms. Our findings here have significant managerial implications for real-world manufacturing environments integrated with AGVs.	Jurnal	2022	Energy efficiency, Automated guided vehicles (AGVs), Multiobjective scheduling, Evolutionary algorithm (EMOEA), Taguchi analysis.
