Informasi Publikasi Dr. Ing. Indar Sugiarto, S.T., M.Sc.
	BCI Demographics: How many (and what kinds of) people can use an SSVEP BCI?	Brain-computer interface (BCI) systems enable communication without movement. It is unclear why some BCI approaches or parameters are less effective with some users. This study elucidates BCI demographics by exploring correlations among BCI performance, personal preferences, and different subject factors such as age or gender. Results showed that most people, despite having no prior BCI experience, could use the Bremen SSVEP BCI system in a very noisy field setting. Performance tended to be better in both young and female subjects. Most subjects stated that they did not consider the flickering stimuli annoying and would use or recommend this BCI system. These and other demographic analyses may help identify the best BCI for each user.	Konferens	2008	Electroencephalography, Neuroimaging, Communication System Control, Brain Computer Interface, Demographics, Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
	Optimization strategy for SSVEP-based BCI in spelling program application	This paper describes an optimization strategy for steady state visual evoked potential (SSVEP)-based brain-computer interface (BCI), especially in a spelling program application. In this application, there are at least three components for implementing a complete BCI application: stimulator, signal processing, and application (spelling program). Ideally, those three components should run on different processing units in order to obtain optimum performance. But integrating those three components in one computer system also gives advantages: make it easier for the subject to concentrate and simplifies the system configuration. There are two main parts that need to be optimized: the flickering animation and the spelling system. When optimizing the flickering animation, we will focus on the display driver technology and programming aspects. The optimization of spelling system will be focused on the layout and …	Konferens	2009	Brain-Computer Interface, EEG, SSVEP, spelling program
	Human voice emotion identification using prosodic and spectral feature extraction based on deep neural networks	It is well known that human voice at the perceptual level consists of multimodality information. Therefore, a modality can be shared via neural emotion network through the independent stimuli processes. The expression and identification of emotions are significant steps for the human communication process. This process is biologically adaptive in a continuous manner, and for this reason, human voice identification becomes useful for classifying and identifying an effective specific characteristic between them. In this paper, we propose to identify the difference between the six essentials of human voice emotion. They will be generated using prosodic and spectral features extraction by utilizing Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). The result of our experiment has obtained accuracy as much as 78.83%. It presupposed that the higher intensity of emotions found in the sound sample would automatically trigger the level of accuracy as same as a higher one. Moreover, gender identification was also carried out along with the approximate accuracy at 90%. Nevertheless, from the learning process with the composition of 80:20, the training-testing data has obtained an exact accurate result by 100%.	Konferens	2019	Neural Network, Deep Neural Network, Spectral Features, Prosodic Features, Spectral Feature Extraction, Convolutional Neural Network, Artificial Neural Network.
	Building a spiking neural network model of the basal ganglia on spinnaker	We present a biologically inspired and scalable model of the basal ganglia (BG) simulated on the spiking neural network architecture (SpiNNaker) machine, a biologically inspired low-power hardware platform allowing parallel, asynchronous computing. Our BG model consists of six cell populations, where the neuro-computational unit is a conductance-based Izhikevich spiking neuron; the number of neurons in each population is proportional to that reported in anatomical literature. This model is treated as a single-channel of action-selection in the BG, and is scaled-up to three channels with lateral crosschannel connections. When tested with two competing inputs, this three-channel model demonstrates action-selection behavior. The SpiNNaker-based model is mapped exactly on to SpineML running on a conventional computer; both model responses show functional and qualitative similarity, thus validating the usability of SpiNNaker for simulating biologically plausible networks. Furthermore, the SpiNNaker-based model simulates in real time for time-steps ≥ 1 ms; power dissipated during model execution is ≈ 1.8 W	Journal	2018	Action selection, basal ganglia, biologically-inspired neural network, Izhikevich neuron model, neuromorphic, SpineCreator, SpineML, SpiNNaker.
	High performance computing on spinnaker neuromorphic platform: A case study for energy efficient image processing	This paper presents an efficient strategy to implement parallel and distributed computing for image processing on a neuromorphic platform. We use SpiNNaker, a many core neuromorphic platform inspired by neural connectivity in the brain, to achieve fast response and low power consumption. Our proposed method is based on fault-tolerant fine grained parallelism that uses SpiNNaker resources optimally for process pipelining and decoupling. We demonstrate that our method can achieve a performance of up to 49.7 MP/J for Sobel edge detector, and can process 1600 x 1200 pixel images at 697 fps. Using simulated Canny edge detector, our method can achieve a performance of up to 21.4 MP/J. Moreover, the framework can be extended further by using larger SpiNNaker machines. This will be very useful for applications such as energy-aware and time-critical-mission robotics as well as very high resolution computer vision systems	Konferens	2016	Spiking Neural Network Architecture, Image Processing, Neuromorphic, High Performance Computing
	Spelling with the Bremen brain-computer interface and the integrated SSVEP stimulator	In this work, the performance of a visual stimulator displayed on a computer screen was evaluated in a brain-computer interface (BCI) spelling task. The stimulator and spelling program were tested in a group of 106 subjects at the CeBIT 2008. The task was to spell words with the Bremen Brain-computer interface based on steady-state visual evoked potentials. Subjects navigated a cursor through a matrix of 32 characters by selective attention to one of five flickering lights. Each light encoded cursor movement commands (up, down, right, left) or select. A mean accuracy of 92% was achieved.	Journal	2016	Brain-Computer Interface, Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
	Display optimization in SSVEP BCIs	Brain–computer interface (BCI) systems allow people to send information without moving [1]. Some BCIs rely on the Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP), a type of EEG activity that occurs when subjects focus attention on a stimulus that oscillates between about 5-40 Hz. Thus, the efficacy of an SSVEP BCI depends on how quickly and effectively it can distinguish SSVEP activity that reflects user attention from background noise. This depends on many factors, including EEG signal quality, task and display parameters, signal processing approaches, and user factors. SSVEP BCIs often utilize stimuli containing oscillating checkerboxes. Figure 1 below shows four examples of such displays [2][3][4][5]. In these BCIs, subjects direct attention to one of the oscillating checkerboxes to convey interest in a corresponding region. Thus, directing attention to the left checkerbox would move a game character, map, car, or cursor. It is also possible for subjects to focus attention on two targets, which could improve information throughput by increasing the number of commands available to a user [6].	Journal	2008	Brain-Computer Interface, Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
	Klasifikasi Motif Batik menggunakan metode Deep Convolutional Neural Network dengan Data Augmentation	Pada penelitian-penelitian sebelumnya yang bertujuan untuk mengklasifikasikan motif batik umumnya menggunakan motifmotif geometri saja dengan menggunakan Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) VGG dan penerapan augmentasi sebatas pada skala dan rotasi. Untuk itu pada penelitian ini akan dilakukan augmentasi yang lebih beragam pada model CNN Residual Network (Resnet) dengan objek yang dijadikan penelitian adalah motif geometri dan non-geometri. Penelitian klasifikasi motif batik ini menggunakan metode CNN dengan arsitektur Resnet untuk mengenali pola pada motif batik. Motif batik yang menjadi objek penelitian ini adalah motif kategori geometri (ceplok, kawung, lereng, nitik, dan parang) dan kategori nongeometri (semen dan lunglungan). Selain itu, pada dataset akan diterapkan augmentasi Scale, Random Erase, Rotation, dan Flip. Augmentasi pada dataset diterapkan guna memperbesar jumlah dan meningkatkan variasi pada dataset batik. Penelitian klasifikasi motif batik ini menggunakan metode CNN dengan arsitektur Resnet untuk mengenali pola pada motif batik. Motif batik yang menjadi objek penelitian ini adalah motif kategori geometri (ceplok, kawung, lereng, nitik, dan parang) dan kategori nongeometri (semen dan lunglungan). Selain itu, pada dataset akan diterapkan augmentasi Scale, Random Erase, Rotation, dan Flip. Augmentasi pada dataset diterapkan guna memperbesar jumlah dan meningkatkan variasi pada dataset batik.	Journal	2020	Convolutional Neural Network, CNN Residual Network
	A spiking neural network model of the lateral geniculate nucleus on the SpiNNaker machine	We present a spiking neural network model of the thalamic Lateral Geniculate Nucleus (LGN) developed on SpiNNaker, which is a state-of-the-art digital neuromorphic hardware built with very-low-power ARM processors. The parallel, event-based data processing in SpiNNaker makes it viable for building massively parallel neuro-computational frameworks. The LGN model has 140 neurons representing a “basic building block” for larger modular architectures. The motivation of this work is to simulate biologically plausible LGN dynamics on SpiNNaker. Synaptic layout of the model is consistent with biology. The model response is validated with existing literature reporting entrainment in steady state visually evoked potentials (SSVEP)—brain oscillations corresponding to periodic visual stimuli recorded via electroencephalography (EEG). Periodic stimulus to the model is provided by: a synthetic spike-train with inter-spike-intervals in the range 10–50 Hz at a resolution of 1 Hz; and spike-train output from a state-of-the-art electronic retina subjected to a light emitting diode flashing at 10, 20, and 40 Hz, simulating real-world visual stimulus to the model. The resolution of simulation is 0.1 ms to ensure solution accuracy for the underlying differential equations defining Izhikevichs neuron model. Under this constraint, 1 s of model simulation time is executed in 10 s real time on SpiNNaker; this is because simulations on SpiNNaker work in real time for time-steps dt ⩾ 1 ms. The model output shows entrainment with both sets of input and contains harmonic components of the fundamental frequency. However, suppressing the feed-forward inhibition in the …	Journal	2017	Spiking Neural Network
	A model-based approach to robot kinematics and control using discrete factor graphs with belief propagation	Much of recent researches in robotics have shifted the focus from traditionally-specific industrial tasks to investigations of new types of robots with alternative ways of controlling them. In this paper, we describe the development of a generic method based on factor graphs to model robot kinematics. We focused on the kinematics aspect of robot control because it provides a fast and systematic solution for the robot agent to move in a dynamic environment. We developed neurally-inspired factor graph models that can be applied on two different robotic systems: a mobile platform and a robotic arm. We also demonstrated that we can extend the static model of the robotic arm into a dynamic model useful for imitating natural movements of a human hand. We tested our methods in a simulation environment as well as in scenarios involving real robots. The experimental results proved the flexibility of our proposed methods …	Journal	2017	Robotics, Model-Based Approach, Factor Graph, Robot Kinematics
	Disain dan Implementasi Modul Akuisisi Data sebagai Alternatif Modul DAQ LabVIEW	This paper describes about an alternative module of data acquisition system (DAS), which can be accessed by LabVIEW. The advantage of this DAS module is inexpensive and it has good performance as well as module used in industrial control system. This DAS module is controlled by ATmega64 AVR microcontroller, which will communicate with the LabVIEW by using bidirectional serial communication. This DAS module has 8-bit digital input, 8-bit digital output, 8 channel analog inputs, 2 channel analog outputs. Voltage levels of digital input are 0–5 V and 0–24 V. The digital output of this module is an open collector terminal with “low” level voltage of 0.276 V. Analog input of this DAS module has three ranges. They are 1–5 V with average error of 14.47 mV, 0–10 V with average error of 72.34 mV, and 4–20 mA with average error of 0.037 mA. Range of analog output of this module is 0–10 V with average error of 16.2 mV. This DAS module is not designed for applications that need high accuracy of time. Abstract in Bahasa Indonesia: Sebuah alternatif modul data acquisition system (DAS) yang bisa diakses menggunakan LabVIEW dipaparkan dalam paper ini. Keuntungan utama modul DAS ini adalah dapat dibuat dengan harga sangat terjangkau dan menghasilkan performa yang baik seperti yang biasa digunakan dalam sistem kontrol di industri. Modul DAS tersebut dikendalikan oleh sebuah mikrokontroler AVR ATmega64 yang akan berkomunikasi secara bidirectional dengan LabVIEW menggunakan metode komunikasi serial. Sistem ini dapat digunakan untuk mengakuisisi 8-bit digital input, 8-bit digital output, 8 kanal analog input dan …	Journal	2008	acquisition data system, microcontroller, AVR, LabVIEW, signal conditioner circuit, instrumentation
