Informasi Publikasi Ir. Djoni Haryadi Setiabudi, M.Eng.	Implementasi IoT Fertigation di Urban Farming Alam Sari PPPK Petra	Implementasi IoT di Alam Sari PPPK Petra ini bertujuan untuk membantu Urban Farming PPPK Petra untuk melakukan otomasi pemberian pupuk, pengairan dan pengendali kadar nutrisi air pada tanaman hidroponik. Selain itu hasil implementasi IoT ini dapat menjadi alat peraga pengetahuan teknologi informasi ke pertanian bagi siswa yang berkunjung ke Alam Sari PPPK Petra. Metode yang digunakan adalah observasi ke Alam Sari PPK Petra untuk mengetahui kebutuhan perawatan tanaman hidroponik dan tempat pemasangan peralatan IoT. Langkah berikutnya adalah mendesain dan implementasi sistem hardware dan software yang diperlukan. Langkah terakhir adalah melakukan ujicoba sampai peralatan IoT siap dpakai. Hasil yan diperoleh adalah terpasangnya dua peralatan IoT yaitu IoT Fertigation dan IoT pengendali kadar nutrisi yang dapat memudahkan pekerjaan petugas Alam Sari PPK Petra untuk pemeliharaan tanaman hidroponik sekaligus mengotimalkan produksi tanaman hidroponik.	Jurnal	2024	Hidroponik, Fertigation, Nutrisi, Urban Farming, IoT
	Marketplace based application system to improve customer satisfaction on laundry business	Laundry service shop customers are presently confronted with several service options, qualities, and features. This is due to the inconsistent operational management of these organizations, in delivering maximum satisfaction. These problems often lead to the unsatisfactory level of customers, as they begin to search for better laundry service alternatives, which consumes much time and effort. The studies on laundry service shop businesses have also been widely carried out, as they are found to only focus on the ease of management due to delivery to one shop, which is equipped with features of comfortable services and payments. However, it has not been able to handle the demand of customers and various items, which needs to be sent to different laundry shops. Based on these studies, the laundry business concept should be developed to improve service qualities, with customers having the option to distribute their laundry items to desired laundry service shops, through the placement of one order. According to the development of this system, a sequential simplification from multi to single orders was observed, as the marketplace concept was also used. Furthermore, the manager handled and simplified the multi-order process, which was carried out by distributing orders to several shops, arranging the pick-up and delivery procedures, as well as receiving and transferring payments to all laundry services. The result showed a comparison between the mobile-based laundry business and traditional systems, respectively. This new system result is saving more time and shipping costs, as it handled simple to complex laundry needs with a single click on the application, compared to the old traditional laundry business that involved multi orders. In conclusion, this new marketplace-based application system saves more time and cost, leading to the higher customer satisfaction in laundry business.	Konferensi	2024	-
	Smart Home with Energy Saving Using Demand Side Management Through Particle Swarm Optimization and Home Assistant	Smart home is part of Internet of Things which makes human life easier. However, obstacles arise because each smart home brand has a different control application, so to use a different brand, the respective application must be installed. Another problem is the limited electric power for each house, so it is necessary to arrange so that all electrical equipment only turns on when needed by setting priorities and interests. The contribution of this research is the incorporation of Demand Side Management with PSO to save energy and the Home Assistant Framework to connect smart devices from various brands such as Millenix, Sonoff, Bardi, Ezviz, with additional algorithms to prevent trip down. The test results show that the application made can be used for all new smart device brands added and is able to turn off smart devices according to the results of the PSO algorithm by including the decisions of the users. In addition, after the PSO algorithm was tested and implemented, a 14% percentage reduction in electrical energy use (kWh) was obtained.	Konferensi	2023	Demand side management, Energy conservation, Smart homes, Switches, Energy efficiency, Power systems, Internet of Things
	Detection of Click Bait and Fake News in Online News Using Neural Network Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)	Clickbait is a content title created to attract attention and encourage readers to click on links to specific web pages. Clickbait is also called a trap link in content titles created in such a way as to grab readers' attention. However, the content itself is usually ordinary and sometimes irrelevant to the title. Fake news is false information or news spread with the intention of misleading and manipulating the public. Fake news often aims to spread false narratives, deceive, or cause disbelief in actual facts. The issue is that clickbait and fake news can occur together in a single news article, which requires a system capable of detecting both. Many studies have been conducted on clickbait and fake news, but most of them focus only on one aspect, either clickbait or fake news. The contribution of this research is to simultaneously investigate whether articles found in online news are fake news and/or clickbait, whether the news is only clickbait, only fake news, or whether the news is both clickbait and fake news. Online news sources used as objects include BBC, The Guardian, Reuters, Associated Press (AP), The Independent, AFP, Al Jazeera, and Vice. The method used in this study is Long Short-Term Memory and Neural Network. Only one model is used in this study, trained first with clickbait dataset and then with fake news dataset. The results of this research show that the model trained with combined data achieves an accuracy of 97.7%. It successfully predicts fake news dataset with an accuracy of 51.7% and clickbait dataset with 94.6% accuracy.	Konferensi	2023	Neural Network, Short-term Memory, Long Short-term Memory, Fake News, Long Short-term Memory Network, Online News, Misinformation, Short-term Memory Network, Al Jazeera, Machine Learning, Training Data, Deep Learning, Learning Algorithms, Convolutional Neural Network, Artificial Neural Network, Random Forest, Decision Tree, Machine Learning Methods, F1 Score, Text Data, Graph Neural Networks, Fake Data, Layer Model, Common Words, Word2vec Model, Dropout Layer, Feed-forward Layer, Model Training Process, Invalid Data, Detection Process
	Effect of Students’ Activities on Academic Performance Using Clustering Evolution Analysis	Educational data mining is a technique to evaluate educational process of university students, especially in their early stages. Most preliminary studies focus on observing courses undertaken by students from one semester to the next to predict their success rate. However, besides studying, many students are also involved in non-academic activities, which tends to affect their grades. Therefore, the research aims to determine the effect of student activities on grades while taking into account their academic activities. The method used for clustering is K-Means. Data are collected by observing students’ activity patterns in lectures. The research is conducted in two study programs at Petra Christian University: Business Management and Architecture. The results show that the K-Means method gives good results. The clusters formed from the data show non-homogenous groups and produce insights from several groups. The results show a tendency for students’ performance to increase along with the number of activities and points earned. Most students have increased activities during busy times in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth semesters. The peak is between the fifth and sixth semesters. Then, it starts to decrease in the seventh and eighth semesters. Therefore, students’ activities in the Business Management study program affect performance significantly. Meanwhile, in the Architecture study program, it has an insignificant effect on performance.	Article	2023	Students’ Activities, Academic Performance, Clustering Evolution Analysis
	Aplikasi Moblie Learning untuk Meningkatkan Interaksi Pembelajaran dalam Mendukung Penyerapan Materi Pembinaan UMKM oleh LPPM Universitas Kristen Petra dengan Menerapkan Model Learning Group	"Pembelajaran synchronous yang diberikan oleh LPPM dalam event pembelajaran seringkali terbatas, dan membuat peserta UMKM harus memahami dan mengembangkan materi yang sudah disampaikan secara individual setelah mendapatkan pembelajaran. Hal ini membuat kurangnya interaksi dalam pembelajaran, dan membuat minat serta perhatian UMKM menjadi berkurang untuk meningkatkan pembelajaran dari materi yang didapatkan, terutama ketika menemukan kesulitan dalam pembelajaran. Hal tersebut dapat mempengaruhi tingkat penyerapan materi oleh UMKM menjadi tidak maksimal. Beberapa penelitian yang dilakukan sebelumnya dengan menggunakan mobile learning masih memiliki kelemahan, yaitu pembelajaran masih lebih terfokus pada individual learning, sehingga tidak ada interaksi dalam proses belajar melalui mobile learning.

Untuk mengatasi masalah tersebut, dalam penelitian ini dirancanglah sebuah aplikasi mobile learning dengan model learning group yang memiliki fitur kolaboratif, seperti fitur forum tugas dimana UMKM dapat memilih soal tugas yang akan dikerjakan kemudian saling memberikan komentar nilai satu sama lain apakah jawaban di setiap soal sudah tepat, problem box untuk saling membantu memberi solusi dari pemahaman materi yang kurang, forum diskusi untuk mendiskusikan hal-hal yang belum dibahas dalam materi, glossary, chat dengan tutor dan dukungan mobile push notification untuk mendorong UMKM lebih aktif"	Jurnal	2022	Collaborative Mobile Learning; Mobile Application; MSME; Flutter; Learning group.
	Game RPG Berbasis Android untuk Mendorong Pengguna Berolahraga	With the lockdown period due to Covid-19, maintaining stamina and body health is a priority. People are advised to reduce activities outside the home and work from home. Working from home is often done behind a desk, and after work people do activities to relieve boredom such as watching television, playing games, and other sedentary activities that cause them to be unhealthy. Playing games on a smartphone is becoming more popular because they are easily accessible and only require a smartphone that has many features already on it. This thesis research aims to create a game application on a smartphone to overcome this problem. This RPG game application, is hoped to increase people's interest in exercising by playing on a smartphone that detects motion using the accelerometer sensor and calculates calorie burned using the MET formula. The results of testing the game show that 40% of respondents are more interested in exercising. In addition, the calculation of calories is quite accurate compared to other tools. And it is also proven that this game can meet the recommended daily exercise.	Jurnal	2022	exercise; android; accelerometer; game; RPG; calories; MET
	Analisis Sentimen Dari Keywords Yang Dimasukan Pengguna Di Twitter Indonesia Untuk Penunjang Pembelajaran Strategi Komunikasi Di Program Studi Ilmu Komunikasi Universitas Kristen Petra Dengan Metode Cnn-Bidirectional Lstm	To increase online media traffic, the first effort made by online media is to examine the trending phenomenon with the right marketing strategy. One of the methods that online media is used is a communication strategy that utilizes the sentiment analysis method. In reality, students of Communication Science Major at Petra Christian University are not optimally using sentiment analyst system because the sentiment analysis system for the Communication Studies Study Program (Netray) cannot be run by more than one student or is not used simultaneously and the price of the application is still not affordable if the students want to subscribe Netray. So a sentiment analysis system is needed to support the learning of the Communication Science Major at Petra Christian University. In previous related research, there was research that discussed the analysis of the #crowdfunding campaign on Twitter but there was not include sentiment analysis, there are only topological analysis, spatial analysis and others analysis. In addition, there are studies that use various deep learning methods of sentiment analysis, by researching CNN, DNN, RNN, Bi-Lstm, but none of them combine these methods. So it can be concluded that research will be made that analyzes sentiment analysis and combines deep learning methods. Sentiment analysis is the process of using text analytics to obtain various data sources from the internet and various social media platforms. Sentiment analysis can be utilized with artificial intelligence or with computing, because it is more efficient . Sentiment analysis can be complemented by methods from artificial intelligence systems, namely deep learning CNN-BILSTM. CNN-BILSTM is a combination of the two methods of CNN and bidirectional LSTM where CNN is the input layer and bidirectional LSTM is the layer that extracts features from the input. The dataset used in this application is retrieved from github by adopting the CC BY-NC (Common Creative Non Commercial) License. Data used in the deep learning model which contains a collection of Indonesian tweets containing neutral, positive, negative sentiments.From two testing this thesis using twitter as the online media. From the first test, 20 tweets were searched, the tweet contain "Shin tae yong” and yielded an accuracy of 30%. The second test was tested by 45 students of the Petra Christian University Communication Science Program at Petra Christian University Surabaya in the Q2.505 building where this application was tried and applied, after that the application was assessed with a satisfaction questionnaire which resulted in an average score of 4.01, so this application can meet the needs of the Petra Christian University Communication Science Program with the initial target of a satisfaction questionnaire of 3.75.	Jurnal	2022	sentiment analysis; CNN-BILSTM; Communication Science Major in Petra Christian University; Twitter
	Sistem Pakar Diagnosa Penyakit Ikan Arwana dengan Menentukan Tingkat Kualitas Air Menggunakan Forward Chaining dan Simple Additive Weighting	Ikan arwana selalu memiliki daya tari tersendiri bagi masyarakat Indonesia, maupun mancanegara. Namun setiap makhluk hidup pasti pernah terserang penyakit, termasuk ikan arwana sendiri. Penyakit pada arwana sering kali tidak teridentifikasi dengan baik oleh penghobi maupun pemula karena banyak parameter yang harus diperhatikan. Salah satu masalah dalam mengidentifikasi penyakit arwana adalah masalah kesesuaian parameter air dengan ikan arwana. Sistem pakar dilengkapi dengan metode Forward Chaining dan Simple Additive Weighting. Forward Chaining memungkinkan sistem pakar menanyakan pertanyaan yang dibutuhkan saja. Simple Additive Weighting digunakan untuk menentukan tingkat kecocokan parameter pada ikan arwana. Metode ini memungkinkan kita untuk menentukan apakah kualitas air cocok dengan ikan arwana dengan melakukan perhitungan berdasarkan bobot parameter air dengan cepat.	Jurnal	2022	expert system; Forward Chaining; Simple Additive Weighting; diagnosis of arwana fish disease; suitability of water quality in arwana
