Informasi Publikasi Dr. Roy Setiawan, S.Kom., M.M., M.SM., M.Th.
	Application of Artificial Intelligence powered digital writing assistant in higher education: randomized controlled trial	A major challenge in educational technology integration is to engage students with different affective characteristics. Also, how technology shapes attitude and learning behavior is still lacking. Findings from educational psychology and learning sciences have gained less traction in research. The present study was conducted to examine the efficacy of a group format of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) powered writing tool for English second postgraduate students in the English academic writing context. In the present study, (N = 120) students were randomly allocated to either the equipped AI (n = 60) or non-equipped AI (NEAI). The results of the parametric test of analyzing of covariance revealed that at post-intervention, students who participated in the AI intervention group demonstrated statistically significant improvement in the scores, of the behavioral engagement (Cohen's d = .75, 95% CI [0.38, 1.12]), of the emotional engagement Cohen's d = .82, 95% CI [0.45, 1.25], of the cognitive engagement, Cohen's d = .39,95% CI [0.04, .76], of the self-efficacy for writing, Cohen's d = .54, 95% CI [0.18, 0.91], of the positive emotions Cohen's d = . 44, 95% CI [0.08, 0.80], and of the negative emotions, Cohen's d = −.98, 95% CI [−1.36, −0.60], compared with NEAI. The results suggest that AI-powered writing tools could be an efficient tool to promote learning behavior and attitudinal technology acceptance through formative feedback and assessment for non-native postgraduate students in English academic writing.	Journal	2021	Artificial Intelligence, Automated writing evaluation, L2 writing, Feedback, Pedagogy, ESL, Formative assessment
	Small and medium‑sized enterprises’ contribution in digital technology	Researchers have mentioned the importance of digitization in improving efficiency and productivity in Small and Medium Enterprises (SME). Fortunately, there is no proof that Digitization can be used to deal with the outcome of severe incidents like COVID-19. The research paper suggested that the increased rate of SMEs has increased significantly. This was entirely due to the advent of Digital Technology (DT). In this way, both product and the process become more automated in digitalization, resulting in increased quality and demand. Considering the high scope for higher development, Indias SME sector still has much space for new digital technologies to be integrated. This paper addresses the main scenario of SMEs in India and their benefit in GDP. Also, the research includes a brief analysis of CRM applications and digital payment options in SMEs.	Research	2021	Small and Medium Enterprises, Digitalization, Customer Relationship Management
	Closed-loop supply chain network design with sustainability and resiliency criteria	Today, the research on the closed-loop supply chain network design with sustainability and resiliency criteria is a very active research topic. This paper provides a new closed-loop supply chain under uncertainty with the use of resiliency, sustainability, and reliability dimensions among the first studies. To model this problem, a two-stage stochastic programming approach is used. To create robust solutions against uncertainty, a conditional value at risk criterion is contributed. The proposed model aims to minimize the total cost, environmental pollution, and energy consumption while maximizing the job opportunities as the social factor. In addition to the sustainability goals, the energy consumption is considered to be the last objective to be minimized. To show the applicability of the proposed model, an automobile assembler industry is applied. To solve the model, the Lp-metric method is employed to transform …	Journal	2021	Supply Chain Network Design
	An educational tool for enhanced mobile e-Learning for technical higher education using mobile devices for augmented reality	In all dimensions of education and all subjects, Smartphones have turned out to be broadly acknowledged technology. It plays an essential task in advanced online education systems. Because of smart devices' effortlessness and extension property, it is getting to be mandatory for portable applications. This paper analyses the research on Smart Devices (SD) to incorporate visual simulation into e-learning. The researchers created an Augmented Reality (AR) platform for e-learners to expand the coursebook with graphics and virtual multimedia applications. This paper recommends a Mobile e-Learning (MeL) application termed “MeL app". The advanced MeL app methods have been tested using Mann-Whitney ‘U' Test in the lecture hall using real-time learners. The proposed MeL app planned to create the learning practice easier, focusing on e-learner's requirements by encouraging e-learners and instructor …	Journal	2021	Augmented Reality, Smart Devices, Mobile E-Learning, Technical Higher Education
	The artificial intelligence and inventory effect on banking industrial performance	A vital element in development by the main technological problems is structural change and an improved substantiality of good leadership. Many of what we do at the beginning of infrastructure, technology and data is almost unknown, and a great deal of it is related to transition and the acceptance of the company. While the study results are continually reinforced, it remains a crucial challenge for others to consider that necessary enhancement in analysis guidelines, policies and skills will result in a generational change in the process. A substantial range of reports has interpreted the influential effect of large data on their activities for companies in the United States. The primary goal is to ensure that the banks productivity fluctuates when the Banks artificial intelligence programs cannot integrate effectively and reliably, with a longer-term effect on bank profitability. The survey conducted quantitative and qualitative methodologies by conducting comprehensive interviews and surveys with a determined number of data collection respondents. It then examined the data collected with the use of the SPSS methodological tool to verify the hypotheses. The results show that artificial intelligence programs in the banks had a greater financial performance. Therefore, the researchers should be able to choose many variables to create a modern questionnaire to assess the significance and effect of artificial intelligence on the success of the Bank and the management of big data	Journal	2021	Artificial Intelligence, Industrial Performance, FInancial Efficiency, Intelect Artificial, Inventory Management, Management Compentencies, Technological Skills
	Surface tension of binary mixtures containing environmentally friendly ionic liquids: insights from artificial intelligence	The surface tension (ST) of ionic liquids (ILs) and their accompanying mixtures allows engineers to accurately arrange new processes on the industrial scale. Without any doubt, experimental methods for the specification of the ST of every supposable IL and its mixtures with other compounds would be an arduous job. Also, experimental measurements are effortful and prohibitive; thus, a precise estimation of the property via a dependable method would be greatly desirable. For doing this task, a new modeling method according to artificial neural network (ANN) disciplined by four optimization algorithms, namely teaching–learning-based optimization (TLBO), particle swarm optimization (PSO), genetic algorithm (GA) and imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA), has been suggested to estimate ST of the binary ILs mixtures. For training and testing the applied network, a set of 748 data points of binary ST of IL systems within the temperature range of 283.1–348.15 K was utilized. Furthermore, an outlier analysis was used to discover doubtful data points. Gained values of MSE & R2 were 0.0000007 and 0.993, 0.0000002 and 0.998, 0.0000004 and 0.996 and 0.0000006 and 0.994 for the ICA-ANN, TLBO-ANN, PSO-ANN and GA-ANN, respectively. Results demonstrated that the experimental data and predicted values of the TLBO-ANN model for such target are wholly matched.	Journal	2021	Artificial Neural Network, Teaching-Learning-Based Optimization, Particle Swarm Optimization, Genetic Algorithm, Imperialist Competitive Algorithm
	IoT based virtual E-learning system for sustainable development of smart cities	Globally, cities are emerging into Smart Cities (SC) as a result of sustainable cities and the adaption of recent Internet of Things (IoT) technology. It is becoming essential to involve students in sustainability as engineering and technology are crucial elements in fixing the past adverse effects on our globe. Engineering e-learners are being educated on the sustainable development of SC in many Smart e-learning Tools (SeT) and infrastructure faculties around the world, especially in developing Asian countries such as India. This research paper presents an advanced solution for interactive Smart Learning Environment (SLE) systems based on new IoT technologies in the Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) found in Smart Learning Environments (SLE) for SC people. The proposed IoT-Ve-LS system provides an optimized solution for online classes to attend classes using VR/AR glasses to feel the interactions between Smart Digital Devices (SDD) as practically as in practice. The new Virtual e-Learning System (Ve-LS) is experimental, allows automatic Information and Communications Technology (ICT) development, and offers an extraordinary SLE for increased global recognition. This paper focuses on IoT-Ve-LS, a tool for SLE. The IoT-Ve-LS domain has been fast-growing through the emerging technological trends of the IoT. The IoT-Ve-LS method used in the design and implementation allows flexible usage and integration of the online courses by SLE. The impacts of empirical E-learning evaluation on implementing IoT techniques in online tutoring have been analysed to find out its research hypothesis. Our IoT-sensor-based Reservoir Computing allows the classification of short-term learning language sentences relatively quickly, highlighting the minimal training time and optimized solution of real-time cases for controlling temporal and sequential signals at the cloud computing level. The triangulation analysis in information gathering endorses the theoretical models that use computable and personalized approaches.	Journal	2022	Internet of Things, Smart Cities, Smart e-learning Tools, Virtual Reality
	Sustainable closed-loop mask supply chain network design using mathematical modeling and a fuzzy multi-objective approach	The outbreak of the deadly coronavirus, which is increasing the number of victims every day, has created many changes in today’s world. The use of various masks is the most important social tool against this virus. Given the importance of rapid and quality supply of masks in the current situation, it is necessary to study supply chain in particular. In this research, the design of a closed chain supply chain network for different types of masks is assessed. The studied supply chain includes suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, and retailers in the forward flow and collection centers, separate centers, recycling centers, and disposal centers in the backward flow. In this regard, a multi-objective mathematical model with the objectives of increasing the total profit and reducing the total environmental impact, and maximizing social responsibility is presented. The optimization of this mathematical model has been done using a fuzzy optimization approach in GAMS software. The results of this study show that maximizing the total profit and minimizing the environmental effects and maximizing social responsibility are in contrast to each other. In addition, the sensitivity analysis indicated that the customers’ demand can affect all aspects of the sustainable supply chain simultaneously.	Journal	2021	mask supply chain, sustainable supply chain network design, closed-loop supply chain, fuzzy optimization approach, environmental effects, social responsibility
	Certain investigation of fake news detection from facebook and twitter using artificial intelligence approach	The news platform has moved from traditional newspapers to online communities in the technologically advanced area of Artificial Intelligence. Because Twitter and Facebook allow us to consume news much faster and with less restricted editing, false information continues to spread at an impressive rate and volume. Online Fake News Detection is a promising field in research and captivates the attention of researchers. The sprawl of huge chunks of misinformation in social network platforms is vulnerable to global risk. This article recommends using a Machine Learning optimization technique for automated news article classification on Facebook and Twitter. The emergence of the research is facilitated by the strategic implementation of Natural Language Processing for social forum fake news findings in order to distort news reports from non-recurrent outlets. The relent from the study is outstanding with text …	Journal	2022	Natural Language Processing, Hybrid SVM, Machine Learning, Fake News
	Toward estimating standard enthalpy of combustion of pure chemical compounds: extreme learning machine approach	One of the effective thermochemical properties in the determination of heat process efficiency is the combustion enthalpy changes during complete combustion of the compounds. According to the importance of this property in different processes, the main aim of this work is selected as the development of extreme learning machine (ELM) approach to predict the combustion enthalpy in terms of functional groups. To achieve this goal, a comprehensive data set containing 4,590 experimental enthalpy points is used for the preparation and validation of ELM. To investigate the accuracy of the ELM approach in the estimation of the enthalpy, various visual and statistical comparisons are used. These comparisons lead into R2 value of one and low error values for overall phase. The standard deviation, root mean squared error, and mean relative error for overall phase are determined to be 11.18, 14.92, and 0.28 …	Journal	2021	Extreme Learning Machine, Exprimental Data Collection, Extreme Learning Machine
