Informasi Publikasi Tanti Octavia, S.T., M.Eng.
	Museum interactive information broadcasting using indoor positioning system and Bluetooth low energy: A pilot project on Trowulan museum Indonesia	The tourism sector become a promising country income. This is because its nature which is not easily run out if managed properly. This sector can be a great support especially for developing countries such as Indonesia, because usually developing countries income only rely on natural and human resources income. Museums are one of the tourism sectors that have not been explored properly. Museums in Indonesia are still few that using the latest technology such as smartphone application, wifi, bluetooth, RFID. So, that it makes the museum a less attractive place to visit, especially for young generation. This research tries to create an interactive broadcasting museum information by utilizing applications on smartphones, indoor positioning systems, and bluetooth low energy beacons to provide information to museum visitors about artifacts around museum visitor location. As a pilot project a testing was conducted …	Konferensi	2018	Internet of Things, RFID, Infoor Positioning System, Bluetooth
	Dengue fever outbreak prediction in Surabaya using a geographically weighted regression	Dengue Fever is one of the viral diseases of the tropics that are easily spread in high density and humid area such as in Surabaya. Many researchers in various expertise have studied this disease. Some of them use statistical and machine learning approach to predict the outbreak of the disease, so that the government can prevent that incident. In this paper we use the geographically weighted regression for predicting the dengue fever outbreak in Surabaya. The geographically weighted regression has superiority in estimating the coefficient of the explanatory variables locally. So that, we can put more attention into the region with has high estimates coefficient parameters. Here, we look at the locally estimates of the dengue fever infected in the year 2016, 2017, populatioin density and poverty percentage for predicting the dengue fever outbreak in the year 2018. In this study, the pattern of the predicted model can follow the pattern of the true dataset.	Konferensi	2019	Dengue Fever Outbreak, Geographically Weighted Regression, Global Moran I Statisctics, Local Moran Statistics, Locally Parameters Estimate
	Indoor positioning system using BLE beacon to improve knowledge about museum visitors	Generally, a museum has many locations and artifacts collection that display for visitors. Museum manager often have difficulty in obtaining information on visitors behavior such as, is there are particular locations/artifacts in the museum that are frequently/rarely visit by museum visitors, how long visitors spend their time in particular locations/artifacts, etc. The purpose of this study is try to build a suitable system in order to improve knowledge about the behavior of museum visitors by identifying the position of visitors in the museum. This study uses Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Beacon that place around the museum. The visitor mobile phone will detect BLE beacon signal, then the mobile phone application will calculated the visitor’s mobile phone position using the signal strength from the BLE beacons that are detected. The application then sends it to the computer server to display it in as museum visitor heat map. From this information, the museum manager could find out the visitors behavior movement and know which areas/artifacts that frequently/rarely visit by museum visitors. According to distance error testing which compare real location and position of the calculation, it is show that the average of distance error is around 140 cm. So, it can be concluded that the information obtained is sufficient enough to represent the position of museum visitors	Journal	2020	Bluetooth Low Energy, Indoor Positioning System, Mobile Phone
	Tabu search sebagai local search pada algoritma ant colony untuk penjadwalan flowshop	Ant colony optimization (ACO) is one of the meta-heuristic methods developed for finding solutions to optimization problems such as scheduling. Local search method is one part of the ACO which determines the quality of the resulting solution. In this paper, Tabu Search was proposed as a method of local search in ACO to solve the problem of flowshop scheduling. The purpose of this scheduling was to minimize the makespan. Makespan and computation time of the proposed method were compared to the ACO that implemented Job-Index as local search method. Using proposed algorithm, makespan values obtained were not significantly different than solutions of ACO using Job-Index method, and had computation time shorter. Abstract in Bahasa Indonesia: Ant colony optimization (ACO) adalah salah satu metode meta-heuristic yang dikembangkan untuk mencari solusi bagi permasalahan optimasi seperti penjadwalan. Metode local search merupakan salah satu bagian dari ACO yang menentukan kualitas solusi yang dihasilkan. Dalam makalah ini Tabu Search diusulkan sebagai metode local search dalam algoritma ACO untuk menyelesaikan masalah penjadwalan flowshop. Tujuan dari penjadwalan ini adalah untuk meminimalkan makespan. Hasil makespan dan computation time dari metode usulan ini akan dibandingkan dengan algoritma ACO yang menggunakan Job-Index sebagai metode local search. Dengan menggunakan algoritma Tabu Search sebagai local search didapat nilai makespan yang tidak berbeda secara signifikan dibandingkan yang menggunakan metode Job-Index, dengan kelebihan computation time yang lebih …	Journal	2009	Artificial Intelligence, Ant Colony Optimization
	Penerapan Artificial Neural Network dan Rule Based Classifier untuk Mengklasifikasikan Pendonor Darah Potensial pada Sistem Broadcast Pendonor	Salah satu tugas dari UTD PMI Surabaya adalah menyediakan darah yang aman dan berkualitas ketika darah dibutuhkan secara darurat. Ketersediaan darah di UTD PMI Surabaya dapat bersifat tidak tetap, karena bergantung dengan jumlah pendonor yang naik turun dan waktu simpan darah yang tidak lama. Oleh karena itu, UTD PMI Surabaya butuh sebuah sistem untuk mengundang pendonor potensial untuk memenuhi kebutuhan darah ketika dibutuhkan secara darurat, dengan meminimalisir darah yang terbuang sia-sia. Model pengklasifikasian dan pembuatan sistem rekomendasi akan menghasilkan list yang berisi pendonor yang sudah diurutkan berdasarkan prioritas. Pengujian dilakukan dengan membagi data sesuai dengan kondisi lingkungan pengambilan data (sebelum pandemi, saat pandemi dan gabungan dari sebelum dan saat pandemi COVID-19). Nilai MRR tertinggi didapatkan dari model ANN yang dibuat dari data gabungan 90% hasil klasifikasi menggunakan RBC dan fake data. Nilai akurasi yang didapatkan dari model sebesar 91.13% untuk training dan 91.83% untuk testing. Nilai MRR yang dihasilkan sebesar 8.07 x 10-4. Model pengklasifikasian dan pembuatan sistem rekomendasi akan menghasilkan list yang berisi pendonor yang sudah diurutkan berdasarkan prioritas. Pengujian dilakukan dengan membagi data sesuai dengan kondisi lingkungan pengambilan data (sebelum pandemi, saat pandemi dan gabungan dari sebelum dan saat pandemi COVID-19). Nilai MRR tertinggi didapatkan dari model ANN yang dibuat dari data gabungan 90% hasil klasifikasi menggunakan RBC dan fake data. Nilai akurasi yang didapatkan dari model sebesar 91.13% untuk training dan 91.83% untuk testing. Nilai MRR yang dihasilkan sebesar 8.07 x 10-4.	Journal	2022	Artificial Neural Network, Rule Based Classifier, Sistem Rekomendasi, Donor Darah
	Perbandingan Algoritma Simulated Annealing dan Harmony Search dalam Penerapan Picking Order Sequence	Implementation of mobile rack warehouse is commonly used in manufacturing industry because it can minimize the warehouse area used. Applying picking orders in taking of Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) on mobile rack warehouses could give fast loading order. This research aims to find out which algorithm is better in applying picking order sequence in mobile rack warehouse. The algorithm used is Simualted Annealing (SA) and Harmony Search (HS) algorithm. Both of these algorithms will be compared in terms of the gap with the shortest path method. The result shows that the HS algorithm produces a better solution than the SA algorithm with lower CPU time, but the convergence rate of HS is lower than that of SA. HS was able to produce a better solution than the shortest path method of 9 cases, while SA only 8 cases from 15 cases.	Journal	2017	Picking order sequence, simulated annealing, harmony search.
	Spatial multi-layer perceptron model for predicting dengue fever outbreaks in Surabaya	Dengue fever (DF) is a tropical disease spread by mosquitoes of the Aedes type. Therefore, a DF outbreak needs to be predicted to minimize the spread and death caused by it. The spread of dengue fever is a spatial problem. In this paper, we adopted the Multi Linear Perceptron (MLP) to solve the spatial problem, and we called it a spatial multilayer perceptron model (SMLP). In this proposed model, we consider two types of input neurons in the SMLP, a region and the neighbourhood of that region. The spatial inputs dynamically change to the region. Additionally, the neighbourhood numbers of a region are also varied. So, the spatial inputs are changed in terms of the number of inputs and the neighbourhoods. As a result, the proposed model is outperformed the traditional MLP since it can adapt to the neighbourhoods. We can conclude the SMLP model can manage the information and predict the dengue fever outbreak in Surabaya	Journal	2020	Spatial, Multilayer Perceptron, Dengue Fever Outbreak
	Statistical learning for predicting dengue fever rate in Surabaya	Dengue fever happening most in tropical countries and considered as the fastest spreading mosquito-borne disease which is endemic and estimated to have 96 million cases annually. It is transmitted by Aedes mosquito which infected with a dengue virus. Therefore, predicting the dengue fever rate as become the subject of researches in many tropical countries. Some of them use statistical and machine learning approach to predict the rate of the disease so that the government can prevent that incident. In this study, we explore many models in the statistical learning approaches for predicting the dengue fever rate. We applied several methods in the predictive statistics such as regression, spatial regression, geographically weighted regression and robust geographically weighted regression to predict the dengue fever rate in Surabaya. We then analyse the results, compare them based on the mean square error. Those four models are chosen, to show the global estimator’s approaches, eg regression, and the local ones, eg geographically weighted regression. The model with the minimum mean square error is regarded as the most suitable model in the statistical learning area for solving the problem. Here, we look at the estimates of the dengue fever rate in the year 2012, to 2017, area, poverty percentage, precipitation, number of rainy days for predicting the dengue fever outbreak in the year 2018. In this study, the pattern of the predicted model can follow the pattern of the true dataset.	Journal	2020	Global Moran I statistics, local Moran I statistics, regression, spatial regression, geographically weighted regression.
	Robust-Hybrid Genetic Algorithm for a Flow-Shop Scheduling Problem (A Case Study at PT FSCM Manufacturing Indonesia)	This paper discusses the application of Robust Hybrid Genetic Algorithm to solve a flow-shop scheduling problem. The proposed algorithm attempted to reach minimum makespan. PT. FSCM Manufacturing Indonesia Plant 4's case was used as a test case to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm. The proposed algorithm was compared to Ant Colony, Genetic-Tabu, Hybrid Genetic Algorithm, and the company's algorithm. We found that Robust Hybrid Genetic produces statistically better result than the company's, but the same as Ant Colony, Genetic-Tabu, and Hybrid Genetic. In addition, Robust Hybrid Genetic Algorithm required less computational time than Hybrid Genetic Algorithm	Journal	2007	Robust Genetic Algorithm, Hybrid Genetic Algorithm
	Algoritma Goal Programming untuk Driver Assignment pada Simulasi Taksi Online	"Taksi adalah salah satu alat transportasi umum yang banyak 
digunakan oleh masyarakat. Pemasangan driver dan penumpang 
dalam taksi online dapat dilakukan dengan cara menawarkan 
order penumpang kepada seluruh driver terdekat dari lokasi 
penjemputan. Cara ini memiliki efisiensi waktu tinggi. Namun, hal ini menyebabkan naiknya tingkat pembatalan karena driver 
tidak memiliki cukup waktu untuk melihat detail pesanan, hanya 
asal menerima pesanan saja. Hal ini dapat berujung pada menurunnya tingkat kepuasan penumpang dan pendapatan taksi online. Oleh karena itu, faktor-faktor lain seperti rating driver, tingkat pembatalan pesanan driver, jumlah order yang sudah 
diselesaikan driver penting untuk dipertimbangkan dalam proses pemasangan untuk menghasilkan pemasangan yang efisien. Proses pemasangan driver dan penumpang akan dilakukan dengan metode Goal Programming karena metode ini cocok digunakan 
untuk masalah dalam pengambilan keputusan yang melibatkan 
lebih dari satu tujuan (multi-objectives). Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa Goal Programming menghasilkan total waktu kalkulasi tertinggi. Selain itu, rata-rata waktu tunggu penumpang dan jarak tempuh penjemputannya 
terendah. Metode Hungarian Algorithm memiliki waktu kalkulasi 
yang lebih cepat dibandingkan dengan metode Goal 
Programming, Namun, jumlah pemasangannya lebih rendah. Selain itu, rata-rata waktu tunggu penumpang dan jarak tempuh 
penjemputannya lebih tinggi. Metode Random Assignment memiliki waktu kalkulasi tercepat dan tingkat keberhasilan 
pemasangan tertinggi. Namun, rata-rata waktu tunggu penumpang 
dan jarak tempuh penjemputannya jauh di atas kedua metode pembandingnya. Penambahan faktor di luar waktu dan jarak 
jemput dalam persentase yang rendah dapat mempengaruhi nilai rata-rata faktor tersebut menjadi lebih baik. Namun, rata-rata waktu dan jarak tempuh penjemputannya menjadi bertambah."	Journal	2022	Goal Programming, Hungarian Algorithm, Online Taxi, Assignment
