Informasi Publikasi Prof. Dr.Eng., Ir. Rolly Intan, M.A.Sc.
	Fuzzy functional dependency and its application to approximate data querying	Reviews a new definition of fuzzy functional dependency based on conditional probability and its application to approximate data reduction related to the operation of projection in classical relational databases in order to construct fuzzy integrity constraints. We introduce the concept of partial fuzzy functional dependency, which expresses the fact that a given attribute X does not determine Y completely, but in the partial area of X it might determine Y. Finally, we discuss another application of fuzzy functional dependency in constructing fuzzy query relations for data querying and approximate joins of two or more fuzzy query relations in the framework of an extended query system.	Konferens, Proceedings	2000	Fuzzy, FFD (Fuzzy Functional Dependency) ,Data Querying
	Generalized fuzzy rough sets by conditional probability relations	In 1982, Pawlak proposed the concept of rough sets with a practical purpose of representing indiscernibility of elements or objects in the presence of information systems. Even if it is easy to analyze, the rough set theory built on a partition induced by equivalence relation may not provide a realistic view of relationships between elements in real-world applications. Here, coverings of, or nonequivalence relations on, the universe can be considered to represent a more realistic model instead of a partition in which a generalized model of rough sets was proposed. In this paper, first a weak fuzzy similarity relation is introduced as a more realistic relation in representing the relationship between two elements of data in real-world applications. Fuzzy conditional probability relation is considered as a concrete example of the weak fuzzy similarity relation. Coverings of the universe is provided by fuzzy conditional probability relations. Generalized concepts of rough approximations and rough membership functions are proposed and defined based on coverings of the universe. Such generalization is considered as a kind of fuzzy rough set. A more generalized fuzzy rough set approximation of a given fuzzy set is proposed and discussed as an alternative to provide interval-value fuzzy sets. Their properties are examined.	Journal	2002	Pattern Recognition, Artificial Intelligence
	Hard: Subject-based search engine menggunakan tf-idf dan jaccard s coefficient	Paper ini memperkenalkan suatu algorima search engine berdasarkan konsep HARD (High Accuracy Retrieval from Documents) dengan menggabungkan penggunaan metoda TF-IDF (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency) dan Jaccard's Coefficient. Kedua metoda, TF-IDF dan Jaccard's Coefficient dimodifikasi dan dikembangkan dengan memperkenalkan beberapa rumusan baru. Untuk lebih memudahkan dalam mengerti algoritma dan rumusan baru yang diperkenalkan, beberapa contoh perhitungan diberikan. Kata kunci: HARD, Tf-Idf, koefisien Jaccard, search engine, himpunan fuzzy.	Journal	2006	HARD (High Accuracy Retrieval from Documents), Tf-Idf (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency), koefisien Jaccard, search engine, himpunan fuzzy.
	Conditional probability relations in fuzzy relational database	In 1982, Buckles and Petry [1] proposed fuzzy relational database for incorporating non-ideal or fuzzy information in a relational database. The fuzzy relational database relies on the spesification of similarity relation [8] in order to distinguish each scalar domain in the fuzzy database. These relations are reflexive, symmetric, and max-min transitive. In 1989, Shenoi and Melton extended the fuzzy relational database model of Buckles and Petry to deal with proximity relation [2] for scalar domain. Since reflexivity and symmetry are the only constraints placed on proximity relations, proximity relation is considered as generalization of similarity relation. In this paper, we propose design of fuzzy relational database to deal with conditional probability relation for scalar domain. These relations are reflexive and not symmetric.We show that naturally relation between fuzzy information is not symmetric. In addition, we define a notion of redundancy which generalizes redundancy in classical relational database. We also discuss partitioning of domains with the objective of developing equivalence class.	Konferens	2001	Fuzzy, Probability Relations, Relational Database
	Fuzzy conditional probability relations and their applications in fuzzy information systems	In our real-world applications, data may be imprecise in which levels or degrees of preciseness of data are intuitively different. In this case, fuzzy set expressions are considered as an alternative to represent the imprecise data. In general, the degree of similarity relationship between two fuzzy (imprecise) data in real-world applications may not necessarily be symmetric or transitive. In order to provide such a degree of similarity between two fuzzy data, we introduced the fuzzy conditional probability relation. The concept of a fuzzy conditional probability relation may be considered as a concrete example of weak similarity relation which in turn is a special type of fuzzy binary relation generalizing similarity relation. Two important applications concerning the application of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD) in the presence of a fuzzy data table (usually called fuzzy information system), namely removing redundant objects and recognizing partial or total dependency of (domain) attributes, are considered induced by the fuzzy conditional probability relation. Here, the fuzzy information system contains precise as well as imprecise data (fuzzy values) about objects of interest characterized by some attributes. Related to the dependency of attributes, we introduce the fuzzy functional dependency that satisfies Armstrong’s Axioms. In addition, we also discuss some interesting applications such as approximate data reduction and projection, approximate data querying and approximate joining in order to extend the query system.	Journal	2004	Fuzzy, Fuzzy Conditional Probability Relations, Fuzzy Information Systems
	Sistem rekomendasi mata kuliah pilihan menggunakan metode user based collaborative filtering berbasis algoritma adjusted cosine similarity	Sistem rekomendasi merupakan sistem yang memberikan rekomendasi pada suatu item yang dapat digunakan untuk membantu user dalam mengambil keputusan. Dalam perkuliahan, mahasiswa diwajibkan untuk mengambil keputusan akan mata kuliah pilihan yang harus diambil selama menjalani perkuliahan. Akan tetapi, tidak jarang banyak sekali mahasiswa yang kebingungan dalam menentukan mata kuliah pilihan yang harus diambil. Dengan demikian diperlukan suatu sistem yang dapat memberikan rekomendasi mata kuliah pilihan sehingga dapat membantu mahasiswa dalam pengambilan keputusan akan mata kuliah pilihan yang akan diambil.	Journal	2019	Adjusted Cosine Similarity
	Generalization of rough sets with α-coverings of the universe induced by conditional probability relations	Standard rough sets are defined by a partition induced by an equivalence relation representing discernibility of elements. Equivalence relations may not provide a realistic view of relationships between elements in real-world applications. One may use coverings of, or non-equivalence relations on, the universe. In this paper, the notion of weak fuzzy similarity relations, a generalization of fuzzy similarity relations, is used to provide a more realistic description of relationships between elements. A special type of weak fuzzy similarity relations called conditional probability relation is discussed. Generalized rough set approximations are proposed by using α-coverings of the universe induced by conditional probability relations.	Konferensi	2001	Artificial Intelligence, α-coverings, Fuzzy Similarity Relation,Conditional Probability Relations
	A proposal of fuzzy multidimensional association rules	Association rules that involve two or more dimensions or predicates can be referred as multidimensional association rules. Rather than searching for frequent itemsets (as is done in mining single-dimensional association rules), in multidimensional association rules, we search for frequent predicate sets. In general, there are two types of multidimensional association rules, namely interdimension association rules and hybrid-dimension association rules. Interdimension association rules are multidimensional association rules with no repeated predicates. This paper introduces a method for generating interdimension association rules. A more meaningful association rules can be provided by generalizing crisp value of attributes to be fuzzy value. To generate the multidimensional association rules implying fuzzy value, this paper introduces an alternative method for mining the rules by searching for the predicate sets.	Journal	2006	Multidimensional Association rules, Inter- dimension Association Rules, Data Mining, Fuzzy Sets.
	On knowledge-based fuzzy sets	In fuzzy set, knowledge plays important roles in determining its membership function. By adding component of knowledge, this paper generalizes definition of fuzzy set based on probability theory. Some basic operations are re-defined. Granularity of knowledge is given in two frameworks, crisp granularity and fuzzy granularity. Objectivity and individuality mea-sure are proposed. Special attention is given to approximate reasoning in knowledge-based fuzzy sets representing fuzzy production rules as usually used in fuzzy expert system.	Journal	2002	"Knowledge-based Fuzzy Set, Approximate 
Reasoning, Conditional Probability Relation, 
Objectivity Measure, Individuality Measure."
	Degree of similarity in fuzzy partition	In this paper, we discuss preciseness of data in terms of obtaining degree of similarity in which fuzzy set can be used as an alternative to represent imprecise data. Degree of similarity between two imprecise data represented in two fuzzy sets is approximately determined by using fuzzy conditional probability relation. Moreover, degree of similarity relationship between fuzzy sets corresponding to fuzzy classes as results of fuzzy partition on a given finite set of data is examined. Related to a well known fuzzy partition, called fuzzy pseudopartition or fuzzy c-partition where c designates the number of fuzzy classes in the partition, we introduce fuzzy symmetric c-partition regarded as a special case of the fuzzy c-partition. In addition, we also introduce fuzzy covering as a generalization of fuzzy partition. Similarly, two fuzzy coverings, namely fuzzy c-covering and fuzzy symmetric c-covering are proposed corresponding to fuzzy c-partition and fuzzy symmetric c-partition, respectively.	Konferens	2002	Fuzzy
	Indonesian automated text summarization	Automated Text Summarization (ATS) is a computer-based application to produce a summary from an article but it still keeps an accurate main point from the content of the article. In this research, we build an Indonesian ATS aplication using a virtual graph concept, calculation weight of sentence and weight of relation among sentences, Deductive œ Inductive method in Indonesian Language and Exhaustive Shortest Path Algorithm to provide a sumarization path from the first sentence to the last sentence on every paragraph in the article. The test result shows that the quality of summarization result depends on the type and the structure of the article. System will produce a good summary if the type of the article is an argumentation type and the article's structure has many paragraphs in which each paragraph has more than two sentences.	Journal	2007	Automated Text Summarization, Exhaustive Dijkstra's Algorithm
	Implementasi Fuzzy expert system untuk analisa penyakit dalam pada manusia	Gejala merupakan suatu unsure penting dalam menentukan suatu pasien mengidap penyakit tertentu. Dalam kehidupan nyata, dokter akan menanyakan gejala-gejala pada pasiennya sebelum ia menentukan penyakit pasiennya. Dibuatnya software ini mengambil cara kerja dokter dalam menganalisa pasiennya. Cara kerja software menggunakan metode forward chaining dalam menentukan prediksi awal suatu penyakit setelah pasien memasukkan gejala yang dideritanya. Kemudian dari prediksi penyakit awal, software menggunakan metode backward chaining dalam menanyakan gejala-gejala lain yang pasien belum masukkan. Software ini dibuat dengan menggunakan metode Fuzzy Set dalam mengolah data pada knowledge-based sistem. Metode Fuzzy mengenal kebenaran secara parsial. Hal ini sangat berguna agar sistem yang dibuat memiliki kecerdasan menyerupai manusia. Metode Fuzzy Set merupakan generalisasi dari crisp set dimana elemen dalam suatu set mempunyai nilai interval 0 sampai dengan 1. knowledge-based system dipakai untuk menyimpan informasi dari pakar tentang hubungan antara gejala dengan suatu penyakit menurut intensitas dan frekuensi.	Journal	2008	Fuzzy Expert System, Gejala, penyakit, forward chaining, backward chaining, fuzzy set, fuzzy, knowledge based
	Application of conditional probability in constructing fuzzy functional dependency	In real-world application, information is mostly imprecise or ambiguous. Therefore, the motivation of extending classical (crisp) relational database [Codd, 1970] to fuzzy relational database by Buckles and Petry [1982] stems from the need to be able to process and represent vague, imprecise and partially known (incomplete) information. The concept of fuzzy relational database proposed by Buckles and Petry [1982] are necessary to be extended to a more generalized concept of fuzzy relational database, since the data value in domain attributes of the fuzzy relational model is still considered as a subset of atomic data. In this case, each data value stored in the more generalized concept of fuzzy relational database is considered as a fuzzy subset. An important feature of a relational database is to express constraints in sense of relation of data, known as integrity constraints (ICs).	Book	2015	Fuzzy, Fuzzy Functional Dependency
